docs/source/faq.rst, before:


.. _chapter_faq:

**************************
Frequently Asked Questions
**************************

Here are some answers to frequently-asked questions.
Got a question that isn't answered here? Try the `mailing list`_, or
file an issue `bug tracker`_.

.. _mailing list: radical-pilot-users@googlegroups.com
.. _bug tracker: http://www.github.com/radical-cybertools/radical.pilot/issues/new

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 2


How do I…
=========

...avoid the error "OperationFailure: too many namespaces/collections"
----------------------------------------------------------------------

.. code-block:: bash

    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "application.py", line 120, in __init__
        db_connection_info=session._connection_info)
      File "/lib/python2.7/site-packages/radical/pilot/controller/pilot_manager_controller.py", line 88, in __init__
        pilot_launcher_workers=pilot_launcher_workers
      File "/lib/python2.7/site-packages/radical/pilot/db/database.py", line 253, in insert_pilot_manager
        result = self._pm.insert(pilot_manager_json)
      File "build/bdist.linux-x86_64/egg/pymongo/collection.py", line 412, in insert
      File "build/bdist.linux-x86_64/egg/pymongo/mongo_client.py", line 1121, in _send_message
      File "build/bdist.linux-x86_64/egg/pymongo/mongo_client.py", line 1063, in __check_response_to_last_error
    pymongo.errors.OperationFailure: too many namespaces/collections


This can happen if radical.pilot too many sessions are piling up in the back-end
database.  Normally, all database entries are removed when a RADICAL-Pilot
session is closed via ``session.close()`` (or more verbose via
``session.close(cleanup=True)``, which is the default.  However, if the
application fails and is not able to close the session, or if the session entry
remains puprosefully in place for later analysis with ``radicalpilot-stats``,
then those entries add up over time.

RADICAL-Pilot provides two utilities which can be used to address this problem:
``radicalpilot-close-session`` can be used to close a session when it is not
used anymore; ``radicalpilot-cleanup`` can be used to clean up all sessions
older than a specified number of hours or days, to purge orphaned session
entries in a bulk.


...avoid the error "Permission denied (publickey,keyboard-interactive)." in AGENT.STDERR or STDERR.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The AGENT.STDERR file or the STDERR file in the unit directory shows the following error and the pilot or unit never starts
running:

.. code-block:: bash

    Permission denied (publickey,keyboard-interactive).
    kill: 19932: No such process


Even though this should already be set up by default on many HPC clusters, it
is not always the case. The following instructions will help you to set up
password-less SSH between the cluster nodes correctly.

Log-in to the **head-node** or **login-node** of the cluster and run the 
following commands:  

.. code-block:: bash

    cd ~/.ssh/
    ssh-keygen -t rsa

**Do not enter a passphrase**. The result should look something like this:

.. code-block:: bash

    Generating public/private rsa key pair.
    Enter file in which to save the key (/home/e290/e290/oweidner/.ssh/id_rsa): 
    Enter passphrase (empty for no passphrase): 
    Enter same passphrase again: 
    Your identification has been saved in /home/e290/e290/oweidner/.ssh/id_rsa.
    Your public key has been saved in /home/e290/e290/oweidner/.ssh/id_rsa.pub.
    The key fingerprint is:
    73:b9:cf:45:3d:b6:a7:22:72:90:28:0a:2f:8a:86:fd oweidner@eslogin001

Next, add you newly generated key to ~/.ssh/authorized_keys:

.. code-block:: bash

    cat id_rsa.pub >> ~/.ssh/authorized_keys

This should be all. Next time you run radical.pilot, you shouldn't see that 
error message anymore. 

(For more general information on SSH keys, check out this 
link: http://www.linuxproblem.org/art_9.html)


...avoid the error "Failed to execvp() 'mybinary': No such file or directory (2)"
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This may happen specifically on Gordon.  The full error in STDERR is something like:

.. code-block:: bash

    [gcn-X-X.sdsc.edu:mpispawn_0][spawn_processes] Failed to execvp() 'mybinary': No such file or directory (2)


You need to specify the full path of the executable as mpirun_rsh is not able to find it in the path



...avoid errors from setuptools when trying to use a virtualenv?
----------------------------------------------------------------

This happens most likely because an upgrade of pip or setuptools failed.

We have seen occurences where an update of setuptools or pip can make
a virtualenv unusable.  We don't have any suggestion on how to get the affected
virtualenv clean again - it seems easiest to just start over with a new
virtualenv.  If the problem persists, try to use the default version of
setuptools and pip, i.e. do not upgrade them.



...avoid the error "Received message too long 1903391841"
---------------------------------------------------------

This error may show up in the DEBUG level logs during file staging or pilot
startup, when sftp is used as a transfer protocol.  We have seen this error
being caused by verbose `.bashrc` files (or other login files), which confuses
sftp startup.  Please make sure that any parts of the bashrc which print
information etc. are only executed on interactive shell (ie. on shells which
have a prompt set as `$PS1`).  The snippet below shows how to di that:

.. code-block:: bash

    if [ ! -z "$PS1" ]
    then
      echo "hello $USER"
      date
    fi
    

...avoid the pop-up "Do you want the application python to accept incoming network connections?" on Mac OSX.
---------------------------------------------------------

This is coming from the firewall on your Mac. You can either:

    - click "Allow" (many times) 
    - disable your firewall (temporarily)
    - Sign the application per instructions here: http://apple.stackexchange.com/a/121010


Other Questions
================

How many concurrent RADICAL-Pilot scripts can I execute?
-------------------------------------------------------

From a RADICAL-Pilot perspective there is no limit, but as SSH is used to access many systems, there is a resource specific limit of the number of SSH connections one can make.

Commit message:

add faq entry on shells

docs/source/faq.rst, after:


.. _chapter_faq:

**************************
Frequently Asked Questions
**************************

Here are some answers to frequently-asked questions.
Got a question that isn't answered here? Try the `mailing list`_, or
file an issue `bug tracker`_.

.. _mailing list: radical-pilot-users@googlegroups.com
.. _bug tracker: http://www.github.com/radical-cybertools/radical.pilot/issues/new

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 2


How do I…
=========

...avoid the error "OperationFailure: too many namespaces/collections"
----------------------------------------------------------------------

.. code-block:: bash

    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "application.py", line 120, in __init__
        db_connection_info=session._connection_info)
      File "/lib/python2.7/site-packages/radical/pilot/controller/pilot_manager_controller.py", line 88, in __init__
        pilot_launcher_workers=pilot_launcher_workers
      File "/lib/python2.7/site-packages/radical/pilot/db/database.py", line 253, in insert_pilot_manager
        result = self._pm.insert(pilot_manager_json)
      File "build/bdist.linux-x86_64/egg/pymongo/collection.py", line 412, in insert
      File "build/bdist.linux-x86_64/egg/pymongo/mongo_client.py", line 1121, in _send_message
      File "build/bdist.linux-x86_64/egg/pymongo/mongo_client.py", line 1063, in __check_response_to_last_error
    pymongo.errors.OperationFailure: too many namespaces/collections


This can happen if radical.pilot too many sessions are piling up in the back-end
database.  Normally, all database entries are removed when a RADICAL-Pilot
session is closed via ``session.close()`` (or more verbose via
``session.close(cleanup=True)``, which is the default.  However, if the
application fails and is not able to close the session, or if the session entry
remains puprosefully in place for later analysis with ``radicalpilot-stats``,
then those entries add up over time.

RADICAL-Pilot provides two utilities which can be used to address this problem:
``radicalpilot-close-session`` can be used to close a session when it is not
used anymore; ``radicalpilot-cleanup`` can be used to clean up all sessions
older than a specified number of hours or days, to purge orphaned session
entries in a bulk.


...avoid the error "Permission denied (publickey,keyboard-interactive)." in AGENT.STDERR or STDERR.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The AGENT.STDERR file or the STDERR file in the unit directory shows the following error and the pilot or unit never starts
running:

.. code-block:: bash

    Permission denied (publickey,keyboard-interactive).
    kill: 19932: No such process


Even though this should already be set up by default on many HPC clusters, it
is not always the case. The following instructions will help you to set up
password-less SSH between the cluster nodes correctly.

Log-in to the **head-node** or **login-node** of the cluster and run the 
following commands:  

.. code-block:: bash

    cd ~/.ssh/
    ssh-keygen -t rsa

**Do not enter a passphrase**. The result should look something like this:

.. code-block:: bash

    Generating public/private rsa key pair.
    Enter file in which to save the key (/home/e290/e290/oweidner/.ssh/id_rsa): 
    Enter passphrase (empty for no passphrase): 
    Enter same passphrase again: 
    Your identification has been saved in /home/e290/e290/oweidner/.ssh/id_rsa.
    Your public key has been saved in /home/e290/e290/oweidner/.ssh/id_rsa.pub.
    The key fingerprint is:
    73:b9:cf:45:3d:b6:a7:22:72:90:28:0a:2f:8a:86:fd oweidner@eslogin001

Next, add you newly generated key to ~/.ssh/authorized_keys:

.. code-block:: bash

    cat id_rsa.pub >> ~/.ssh/authorized_keys

This should be all. Next time you run radical.pilot, you shouldn't see that 
error message anymore. 

(For more general information on SSH keys, check out this 
link: http://www.linuxproblem.org/art_9.html)


...avoid the error "Failed to execvp() 'mybinary': No such file or directory (2)"
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This may happen specifically on Gordon.  The full error in STDERR is something like:

.. code-block:: bash

    [gcn-X-X.sdsc.edu:mpispawn_0][spawn_processes] Failed to execvp() 'mybinary': No such file or directory (2)


You need to specify the full path of the executable as mpirun_rsh is not able to find it in the path



...avoid errors from setuptools when trying to use a virtualenv?
----------------------------------------------------------------

This happens most likely because an upgrade of pip or setuptools failed.

We have seen occurences where an update of setuptools or pip can make
a virtualenv unusable.  We don't have any suggestion on how to get the affected
virtualenv clean again - it seems easiest to just start over with a new
virtualenv.  If the problem persists, try to use the default version of
setuptools and pip, i.e. do not upgrade them.



...avoid the error "Received message too long 1903391841"
---------------------------------------------------------

This error may show up in the DEBUG level logs during file staging or pilot
startup, when sftp is used as a transfer protocol.  We have seen this error
being caused by verbose `.bashrc` files (or other login files), which confuses
sftp startup.  Please make sure that any parts of the bashrc which print
information etc. are only executed on interactive shell (ie. on shells which
have a prompt set as `$PS1`).  The snippet below shows how to di that:

.. code-block:: bash

    if [ ! -z "$PS1" ]
    then
      echo "hello $USER"
      date
    fi
    

...avoid the pop-up "Do you want the application python to accept incoming network connections?" on Mac OSX.
---------------------------------------------------------

This is coming from the firewall on your Mac. You can either:

    - click "Allow" (many times) 
    - disable your firewall (temporarily)
    - Sign the application per instructions here: http://apple.stackexchange.com/a/121010


...avoid the error "Could not detect shell prompt (timeout)"
------------------------------------------------------------

We generally only support `sh` and `bash` as login shells on the target
machines.  Please try to switch to those shells if you use others like `zsh` and
`csh/tcsh`.  If you need other shells supported, please open a ticket.

Prompt detecting behaviour can be improved by calling `touch $HOME/.hushloging`
on the target machine, which will suppress some system messages on login.  

If the problem persists, please open a ticket.

Details: we implement rather cumbersome screen scraping via an interactive ssh
session to get onto the target machine, instead of using `paramiko` or other
modules.  This gives us better performance, but most importantly, this gives us
support for `gsissh`, which we did not find available in any other package so
far.


Other Questions
================

How many concurrent RADICAL-Pilot scripts can I execute?
-------------------------------------------------------

From a RADICAL-Pilot perspective there is no limit, but as SSH is used to access many systems, there is a resource specific limit of the number of SSH connections one can make.
