
.. _chapter_schedulers:

**************
Unit Scheduler
**************

.. toctree::

Introduction
------------

The `class:radical.pilot.UnitManager` dispatches compute units to available
pilots for execution.  It does so according to some schedulin algorithm, which
can be selected when instantiating the manager.  Momentarily we support two
schduling algorithms: 'Round-Robin' and 'Backfilling'.  New schedulers can be
added to radical.pilot -- please contact us on the mailing list
`radical-pilot-devel@googlegroups.com' for details on support.

Note that radical.pilot enacts a second scheduling step: once a pilot agent
takes ownership of units which the unit manager scheduler assigned to it, the
agent scheduler will place the units on the set of resources (cores) that agent
is managing.  The agent scheduler can be configured via agent and resource
configuration files (see :ref:`chapter_resources`).

Round-Robin Scheduler (``SCHEDULER_ROUND_ROBIN``)
-------------------------------------------------

The Round-Robin scheduler will fairly distributed arriving compute units over
the set of known pilots, independent of unit state, expected workload, pilot
state or pilot lifetime.  As such, it is a fairly simplistic, but also a very
fast scheduler, which does not impose any additional communication roundtrips
between the unit manager and pilot agents.


Backfilling Scheduler (``SCHEDULER_BACKFILLING``)
-------------------------------------------------

The backfilling scheduler does a better job at actual load balancing, but at the
cost of additional communication roundtrips.  It depends on the actual
application workload if that load balancing is beneficial or not.  

Backfilling is most beneficial for large numbers of pilots and for relatively
long running units (where the CU runtime is significantly longer than the
communication roundtrip time between unit manager and pilot agent).

In general we thus recomment to *not* use backfilling

  - for a single pilot; 
  - for large numbers of short-running CUs.


The backfilling scheduler (BF) will only dispatch units to pilot agents once the
pilot agent is in 'RUNNING' state.  The units will thus get executed even if one
of the pilots never reaches that state: the load will be distributed between
pilots which become 'ACTIVE'.

The BF will only dispatch as many units to an agent which the agent can, in
principle, execute concurrently.  No units will be waiting in the agent's own
scheduler queue.  The BF will react on unit termination events, and will then
backfill (!) the agent with any remaining units.  The agent will remain
under-utilized during that communication.

In order to minimize agent under-utilization, the user can set the environment
variable `RADICAL_PILOT_BF_OVERSUBSCRIPTION`, which specifies (in percent) with
how many units the BF can overload the pilot agent, without waiting for unit
termination notices.  This mechanism effectively hides the communication
latencies, as long as unit runtimes are significantly larger than the
communication delays.  Thre default oversubscription value is '0%', i.e. no
oversubscription.


